Question: You notice that a Linux server's performance has significantly degraded. How would you diagnose and resolve this issue?
Answer- top, htop, iostat, vmstat, free, sar, dmesg,

Question: The / partition on your server is running out of space. What steps would you take to identify and free up disk space?
Answer: df, du, ls, and find | du -sh *| sort -rh | head

Question: You need to deploy a new version of a web application on a Linux server. What steps would you follow to ensure a smooth deployment with minimal downtime?
Answer: You need to discuss different deployment strategies like- Blue Green, Rolling Updates, Backup Plan, Containers etc.

Question: Users are experiencing connectivity issues with a server. How would you troubleshoot and resolve network problems on a Linux server?
Answer: ping, traceroute, netstat, ss, ifconfig or ip, tcpdump, network interfaces, routing tables, and firewall settings

Question: The file system on one of your Linux servers has become corrupted. What steps would you take to recover from this situation?
Answer: fsck, examining dmesg logs for file system errors, and restoring from backups

Question: A critical service on your server has stopped unexpectedly. How would you approach diagnosing and resolving the issue?
Answer: systemctl or service commands, check logs under /var/log or custom location

Question: Our organization requires regular backups of important data with an automated recovery process. How would you set this up on a Linux server?
Answer: rsync, tar, cron, and other backup utilities

Question: You must ensure that your Linux servers are up-to-date with the latest security patches. What is your approach to managing updates and patches?
Answer: yum, apt, dnf, and details of these command

Question: You are required to upgrade the kernel on a production server. What steps would you follow to ensure a successful upgrade?
Answer: Explain process of Kernel Upgrades, What backup to take, discuss about grub, details of grub.conf file.



1 How many flavours of Linux you have worked on?
Ans Ubuntu, Debian, RHEL, Fedora, Kali Linux, CentOS etc..

2 What is a difference between hard link and soft link.
Ans Hardlink - ln , same properties as linked files, inode number is same , even if original file is deleted we can access link
Softlink - ln-s, not same properties as linked files, inode number is different , utilize less space, if original file is deleted we cannot access link

3 Can you explain Linux directory structure.
Ans Starting from the root
 /bin /dev /etc /usr /home /lib /sbin /tmp /var/
 1: bin- contains all executables for many shell commands like cp,cd and many more
 2: dev- Contains special files, including those related to devices like this are virtual devices and not physical devices on disk.
 3: etc- contains configuration files of system. mostly used by admin for password files and networking files. if you want to change system config come here.
 4: usr- container all executalbe file, libraries, source of most of the system programs.
     again usr is divided into sub commands like: 
       /usr/bin: contains basic user commands
       /usr/sbin: containes additional commands for admin
       /usr/share: contains documents to all libraries
 5: home- contais personal directories of specific users.
   example if you create to user ram and shyam: there location will be: /home/ram &   /home/shyam
 6: lib- contains codes and executable binaries.
 7: sbin- contains system binaries
 8: tmp- directory holds temoporary files. temprary means when system restarts all files are gone/deleted.
 9: var- contains program runtime info like logging, user track, caches, here files are not deleted automatically because its crucial info like logs history of sytem.
10: mnt- used by sys admin to mount and add new filsystem
11: proc- contains info about current running process and kernel.
12: media- points to removable disks, like usb, sd card, etc
13: srv- contains services provided by system. for ex: http server
 
4 What is the home directory of root user.
Ans /root

5 Command to check whether specific port is enabled or not.
Ans netstat -tuln | grep :port_number
    lsof -i :port_number
  nmap -p port_number localhost

6 What are daemon services in Linux.
Ans Daemon simply means background processes that runs continuously in Linux, like cron jobs.

7 How can you provide root privileges to any user.
Ans add user in /etc/sudoers file using Visudo

8 How would you check the current running processes on a Linux system?
Ans ps aux, ps -ef , htop

9 Explain the concept of file ownership in Linux and how it relates to permissions.
Ans So when the file is create the user who created file has full control on it.
 if a file is assigned to a group all users in that group share the same permissions.
 you can do ls -la to see permission of file. and ls -l filename to see ownership
ls -l filename command will give you owner name group name etc info.
so when a Alice user create a file named demo.txt he had read write permission and group and others had read only permission.

permission for normal file: for user read and write
                            for group only read
                            for others only read

permission for executable file: for user read and write
                                for group only read
                                for others only read
                                we need to make file executable manually like
                                chmod u+x filename 

if you want to change owner of file:
    sudo chown bob demo.sh  just an example demo.sh ownership is change to bob.

read r - 4
write w - 2
execute x - 1

chmod 777 devops.txt - read , write and execute permissions to user, group and others

10) Describe the process of setting up passwordless SSH between two Linux systems.
Ans)  ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 in one server
copy public key to another server
sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config in same server where you copied key
Set PasswordAuthentication no
restart sshd service

11) How would you manage system updates and patches on Linux servers.
Ans) for ubuntu based os  
   update package -- sudo apt update
   upgrade all packages -- sudo apt upgrade -y
   remove old packages -- sudo apt autoremove -y
   check updated logs -- car /var/log/apt/history.log
   reboot if required -- sudo reboot

12) How would you regain access of Linux server if key is lost.
Ans) Stop the instance (don’t terminate it).
Detach the root volume from the instance.
Attach the volume to another instance that you can access.
Once attached, mount the volume on the new instance and navigate to the ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file of the root (or relevant) user on the attached volume.
Add your new SSH key to the authorized_keys file.
Detach the volume from the second instance and reattach it to the original instance as the root volume.Start the instance again and log in using the new SSH key
